---
title: "Polyvagal Perspective"
date: 2022-06-20
tags:
- seed
- inbox
---

https://sci-hub.se/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2006.06.009

## Highlights
The paper has two objectives: first, to provide an explicit statement of the theory; and second, to introduce the features of a polyvagal perspective. The polyvagal perspective emphasizes how an understanding of neurophysiological mechanisms and phylogenetic shifts in neural regulation leads to different questions, paradigms, explanations, and conclusions regarding autonomic function in bio behavioral processes than peripheral models.

The polyvagal theory requires an expansive conceptualization of the autonomic nervous system to include target organ afferent and efferent pathways, and a quest to understand the reciprocal influences and bidirectional communication between the heart and the central nervous system.

The polyvagal theory provides a ‘‘perspective’’ to frame research questions and is not a static theory. 

Thus, as knowledge of neurophysiology
increases, testable hypotheses will shape and expand the theory.

Without plausible models to synthesize information from various disciplines, it would be difficult to test hypotheses that would link peripheral autonomic function to neurophysiological theory or clinical status.

The early psychophysiologists, defined by their use of the polygraph, applied the polygraph to ‘‘transform’’ unobservable psychological or mental processes into measurable physiological variables.

However, an a physiological ‘‘operational’’ model still dominates the literature and greatly influences how HRVis quantified and interpreted in the literature. For example, various strategies to quantify RSA have focused on phenomenological features (e.g., relation to respiration) and not on neurophysiological (e.g., medullary interneurons, neuropeptides, neurotransmitters) or neuroanatomical features (e.g., source nuclei of vagal efferent pathways).

This change in orientation required a new conceptualization
of the autonomic nervous system that shifted emphasis from
target organs in the periphery to central-peripheral neural
feedback ‘‘circuits.’’ With new models came contradictions of
earlier views of autonomic function. Psychophysiology had
focused on the ‘‘motor’’ component of the autonomic nervous
system, consistent with Langley’s (1921) emphasis on the
motor output of the autonomic nervous system solely as a motor
system. Thus, heart rate, similar to any other observable
behavior, was treated as a ‘‘response.’’ In contrast, a ‘‘system’’
model incorporates an elaboration of feedback mechanisms
from the periphery and central modulators of the output gain of
the efferent pathways

Thus, a systems approach would not only describe the components of the feedback loop, but would also attempt to understand the features of central mechanisms mediating the gain of the output system. In the case of RSA, this would result in a focus on the features that mediate frequency and amplitude. In general, the literature demonstrates that the frequency of RSA is generated by the same brainstem mechanisms involved in generating the frequency of respiration, while the amplitude of RSA represents the functional impact of vagal efferent pathways originating in the nucleus ambiguus on the cardiac pacemaker