---
title: "Systems Generating Systems, Christopher Alexander"
date: 2022-08-09
tags:
- seed
- -inbox
---

**The central point of the whole argument can be stated very simply. The most important properties which anything can have are those properties that deal with its stability.**

**It is stability which gives a thing its essential character. The strength of an arch, the even burning of a flame, the growth of an animal, the balance of a forest ecology, the steady flow of a river, the economic security of a nation, the sanity of a human individual, the health of a society: these are all, in one way or another, concerned with stability.**

**Stability, no matter in which of its many forms, is a holistic property. It can only be understood as a product of interaction among parts.**

**Without a specific statement of what holistic behavior we have in mind, what interactions among what parts cause this behavior, and how they do so, calling a thing a system is no more than saying: “This is a pretty complicated thing, and I don’t understand it very well”.**

When we look at an airline from a systems point of view, we may focus on its scheduling — and we shall learn that because the airline only has a limited number of aircraft, the schedule of a flight from New York to Chicago turns out to be dependent on the schedule of another flight from Minneapolis to Salt Lake City. In this instance, we are looking at the airline ‘as a whole’, because we are looking at the interactions among parts, but we are not concerned with the last button on the last mechanic’s cap. The notion of ‘whole’ refers only to the breadth of vision, not to the inclusion of detail: it is still abstract.

But just occasionally the word is used correctly, even in common language. For instance, when we speak of the Ptolemaic system as opposed to the Copernican system, in each of the cases the word ‘system’ is used correctly: it refers to an abstract way of looking at the interaction among earth, planets, sun and stars — not to the objects themselves.

When we are confronted with a complex thing, we often begin with nothing more than a feeling or a ‘sense’ that it functions as a system. Driven by this feeling, we then try, painstakingly, to abstract out just that holistic behavior which seems essential, and those interactions which cause the behavior. This is an active process. It begins with feeling, and sensing, and only turns to thinking later.

Start with some aspect of life so interwoven that you feel in your bones it must be a system, only you can’t state it yet — and then, once you can feel it clearly, try to pin the system down, by defining the holistic behavior you are discussing and which interactions among which parts create it. **But feel it clearly first, before you try to think it.**

**The systems point of view is not neutral. It will change your whole view of the world. It will lead you to realize that the most important characteristics of human individuals are products of their interactions with other people.** It will lead you to realize that the life of nations — though these nations may seem self-sufficient — is produced by interactions in the whole world, and that they only get their strength from their position in this larger whole. It will lead you to see that the health of cities is produced by interactions among interdependent parts, including houses, cafés and theatres, yes, but also equally including slums and graveyards.

**The system viewpoint is a modern, disciplined, version of the sense of wonder. It is that view of things which man takes when he becomes aware of oneness and wholeness in the world.**

A generating system is not a view of a single thing. It is a kit of parts, with rules about the way these parts may be combined.

To take a more complicated case: the railroad switch-yard. It plainly functions as a whole. In order to understand it as a device for breaking up and making trains, we must focus on the sequence of switches, and on the fact that the length of track in front of the switches depends on the length of track behind the switches and on the length of trains. At the same time, the switch-yard is also plainly generated by a generating system. The pieces of track, switches, couplings, cars, together with the rules for putting them together, form a kit of parts which generates properly functioning switch-yards.

The most complicated case of all, and the clearest, is that of an animal. A landing seagull certainly needs to be seen as a system: so does almost everything else that seagulls do. At the same time, this seagull is created by a generating system: the genetic system. An animal is both something which needs to be seen holistically, and generated by a generating system.

Creating building systems in the present sense is not enough. We need a new, more subtle kind of building system, which doesn’t merely generate buildings, but generates buildings guaranteed to function as holistic systems in the social, human sense.


