---
title: "Questioning Objectives"
date: 2022-07-27
tags:
- sapling
---

Watch this video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mo1kIWMdSqk

[Why Greatness Cannot be Planned, Kenneth Stanley and Joel Lehmann](/books/Why%20Greatness%20Cannot%20be%20Planned,%20Kenneth%20Stanley%20and%20Joel%20Lehmann)

### Notes
If you didn't have responsibilities from your boss, what would you do? 

If your company didn't care about objectives, benchmarks, or milestones, how would you spend your time?

Our culture reveres the pursuit of objectives. Some are admirable, others are frivolous. 

Objectives are like things that we want. Where do our wants come from? 
* Some come from society telling us wants from magazines, books, TV. 
* Family values as well, right? 
* Community values, too, right? (the circles we are in.)

Objectives, all around us, makes us wonder if we can accomplish anything without setting objectives. 

Can we not set an objective first before doing something? 

Most professions require that you set an objective; engineers create specs, scientists need objectives to secure funding; investors and corporations set earnings objectives.

Objectives are reassuring against the unpredictability of life. It's tempting to mechanistically work towards milestones. 

Even the way we frame animals is by the objective of evolutionary desire to reproduce. 

Our culture teaches us that if we set an objective and work hard, put our mind to it, makes reaching that objective possible. 

The result of this a bunch of metrics, measurements, and assessments woven into our lives, like we have become slaves to objectives, toiling away towards impossible perfection. 


### Quotes

Imagine **waking up without thinking about what you need to do today**

Have you ever done that? Suppose then you go to work, but instead of holding the usual meetings and **poring over benchmarks and milestones**, **your boss instead tells you to do whatever you feel is most interesting.** 


**What would you do?** 

When you later check the news online, there is no talk of national testing standards or missed objectives for the economy.

Strangely enough, teachers somehow still teach and money somehow still changes hands anyway. Maybe you post a profile on a dating website, but you leave blank all the answers on what you look for in a partner. Today you aren’t looking for anything in particular, but that still doesn’t stop you from looking. 

**While you probably won’t experience a day like this one anytime soon—a day without objectives—what would life be like if you could?**

Would it be confusing, difficult to navigate, too open-ended—or, quite the opposite, a lot better?

It’s interesting that we rarely talk about the **dominance of objectives in our culture** even though they impact us from the very beginning of life.

And all that assessment **has a purpose**—**to measure our progress towards specific objectives set for us by society or by ourselves, such as mastering a subject and obtaining a job.** 

The reality is that objectives lurk in the background from the earliest moments. But they only start there. Over the years they keep gathering steam, eventually enveloping practically everything we do

If you want evidence for that, all you need to do is stop in at your local bookstore and take a look at the magazine rack. 

* There you will be reminded that you might want to change jobs, lose 15 pounds, start a company, find a date, get promoted, change your look, make a million dollars, buy a house, sell a house, or even complete a video game. 
* In fact, almost anything worth doing is expressed as an objective. Now, we’re not suggesting by any means that all of these objectives area waste of time.
* Of course, many are admirable. Others may be more frivolous, but whatever you may think of one objective or another, **we rarely question the value of framing all our pursuits with objectives.**

Can you imagine life with fewer objectives, or with no objectives at all? 
* Would it lead to any good? 
* Regardless of how you’d answer these questions, at the least they highlight how deeply our culture has come to revere objectives.

A lot of effort and resources are spent measuring progress towards these objectives and others like them. 

But in the case of the schools, their objective is to produce high student test  scores.  Even  nations  set  objectives,  **like  low  crime,  low  unemployment,  and low carbon emissions**

**There’s an assumption behind these pursuits that isn’t often stated but that few would think to question:**
* We assume that any worthy social accomplishment is best achieved by first setting it as an objective and then pursuing it together with conviction.
*  It makes you wonder, is there such a thing as accomplishment without objectives?**
	* **If you take a look at most professions, the answer would appear to be no.**
		* Take engineers for example. They typically set objectives through rigorous specifications. Then they continually measure how their prototypes compare to these specifications.Inventors are similar, conceiving an invention and then pursuing it as an objective. 
		* In the same spirit, scientists must come up with clear objectives to secure funding for  their  projects,  which  are then  judged  by  how  likely they  are to achieve  their objective. 
		* The list goes on. Investors set earnings objectives and corporations set profit objectives.
		* Even artists and designers often mentally conceive a design and set its realization as their objective.
	* The weight of objectives on our thinking even impacts the way we talk about topics like animals in #nature. After all, whenever evolution is discussed, we view animals through the lens of survival and reproduction, evolution’s assumed objective. Even many algorithms, or programs that run inside computers, are designed to work towards some specific objective, such as finding the best search result or playing a better game of chess. In fact, these kinds of algorithms are quite common in artificial intelligence and machine learning. So it may come as no surprise that the term objective function is now practically a household name in such fields.
	* Maybe all this objective mania makes sense. At some level, we must believe it does to have allowed it to dominate our lives so completely. **Or maybe it’s something else—maybe we’ve become so used to objectives defining everything we do that we’ve forgotten that their value can even be questioned.** Either way, there’s a certain appeal to this kind of routine. **The idea that all our pursuits can be distilled into neatly-defined objectives and then almost mechanically pursued offers a kind of comfort against the harsh unpredictability of life.** **There’s something reassuring about the clockwork dependability of a world driven by tidy milestones laid out reliably from the starting line.**
	* Though often unspoken, a common assumption is that the very act of setting an objective creates possibility. The very fact that you put your mind to it is what makes it possible. And once you create the possibility, it’s only a matter of dedication and perseverance before you succeed. This can-do philosophy reflects how deeply optimistic we are about objectives in our culture. All of us are taught that hard work and dedication pay off—if you have a clear objective.
	* Objectives might sometimes provide meaning or direction, **but they also limit our freedom and become straitjackets around our desire to explore. After all, when everything we do is measured against its contribution to achieving one objective or another, it robs us of the chance for playful discovery**. So objectives do come with a cost. Considering that this cost is rarely discussed in any detail, maybe it’s a good idea to look a little harder at what we’re really giving up in exchange for such objective optimism
	* But before we do, it’s important that you know that we aren’t pessimists. It may sound like this book is going in a cynical direction, but that isn’t really true. In fact, we believe that human achievement has no limits. It’s just that we’re going to highlight a different path to achievement, without the need for objectives. **There’s a lot our culture has sacrificed in the name of objectives, and we’re going to take it back**. **They’ve stolen our freedom to explore creatively and blocked us from serendipitous discovery. They ignore the value of following a path for its own uniqueness, rather than for where it may lead.** The chapters ahead will show that great discoveries are lurking just beyond our fingertips, if only we can let go of the security blanket of the objective. **Sometimes, the best way to change the world is to stop trying to change it—perhaps you’ve noticed that your best ideas are often those you were not seeking.** We’ll come back to this paradox later, but first let’s think a little more about the way most people approach achievement today.
	* For example, even if you have a strong hunch that combining two chemicals will lead to an interesting reaction, hardly any scientist will take you seriously unless you can define what that interesting reaction would be. Only then could you say that you have a clear objective, and a legitimate pursuit is underway.
	* Sometimes a word other than “objective” might be used, but usually it plays a similar role. For example, scientists often demand hypotheses from each other because they don’t want to fund research only **because it sounds “interesting.”** “What is the hypothesis?” they’ll insist. It’s similar to asking what is the objective. **Without a hypothesis, an experiment is reduced to mere speculation, little more than child’s play. The hypothesis, like the objective of any project you might want to pursue, certifies that it’s worth pursuing. Even if it might not work out, it still provides a clear outcome that will allow people to judge your success or failure later.**
	* This attitude doesn’t only apply to business or science. [[quartz/content/notes/People don't know what they want]](It’s personal too. If you join a dating site, you’re supposed to know what you want and what you like, so that you can describe what you’re “looking for.”) If you’re starting college, you’re supposed to figure out your major so that you have a clear body of knowledge to pursue. **And as any high school student realizes who is applying to college, even hobbies are supposed to have some kind of purpose.** **“Staring at the wall” will not meet much respect on a college application, even if it’s when you have your best ideas.**
	* Usually progress towards the objective is somehow measured. This is where all the measurements and metrics of our culture come into play. The purpose of all the measuring is to help us figure out whether we’re heading in the right direction. If things aren’t going well, it gives us the chance then to switch directions. For example, in school the objective is to master a subject. Grades are a measure that tell us whether we’re making progress in that direction. So if your grades in school are going down, you may need to change your approach to studying.
	* There’s a useful word that comes from optimization theory that some scientists use to describe this idea of using a measure to help decide what to do next—they call the measure a gradient
	* Obviously we’re going to raise a lot of questions about the benefits of objectives, but one important point is that we’re mainly focused on ambitious objectives—those whose achievement is anything but certain. One of the reasons that objectives aren’t often questioned is that they work perfectly well for more modest pursuits. **If a manufacturer decided to increase efficiency by 5%, no one would be shocked if it succeeded. A software company upgrading its product from version 2.0 to version 3.0 is similarly likely to succeed, as happens all the time**. Everyday successes like these mislead us into believing that setting objectives works well for almost everything. **But as objectives become more ambitious, reaching them becomes less promising—and that’s where the argument becomes most interesting.**
	* Maybe there is even a beautiful new genre of music 
      waiting to be found, so enchanting that all of humanity would succumb to its spell, if only the right artist can find it. Or, if you want to get really ambitious, how about time travel or teleportation? You might even have some big ones of your own, like making a billion dollars. **Of course some ambitious objectives might turn out impossible. But some are possible, and if we could even come close to achieving them, the world would surely change for the better.**
    * The question then is, how will we ever get there? How can we achieve not just improving our golf swing, but our dreams?
    * After all, even if time travel is theoretically possible, the best use of national resources at this moment is surely not to reroute trillions of dollars into an all-out effort to build a time machine. **But why not? Is setting the objective not the first step towards success? Or would pursuing time travel be our Moby Dick, distracting us from what really matters in life?**
    * One exciting aspect of this vast set of all possible images is that some of the great masterpieces do not yet exist because no one has painted or drawn them yet. Put another way, these future masterpieces are not yet discovered.
    *** It’s useful to think of achievement as a process of discovery**. We can think of painting a masterpiece as essentially **discovering it** within the set of all possible images. It’s as if we are searching through all the possibilities for the one we want, which we call our objective
    * All of these pursuits can be viewed as searches for something of value. **It could be new art, theories, or inventions. Or, at a more personal level, it might be the search for the right career.**
    * Whatever you’re searching for, in the end it’s not so different from any other human process of discovery. **Out of many possibilities, we want to find the one that’s right for us.**
    * [[So we can think of creativity as a kind of search.]] But the analogy doesn’t have to stop there. If we’re searching for our objective, then we must be searching through something. **We can call that something the search space**—the set of all possible things. Now try to picture this space—it’s as if different possibilities appear at different locations in a big room. Imagine this giant room in which every image conceivable is hovering in the air in one location or another, trillions upon trillions of images shimmering in the darkness, spanning wall to wall and floor to ceiling.
    * . But because most images are just television noise, most of the room is filled with endless variations of meaningless gibberish. The good stuff is relatively few and far between
    * Let’s pretend you wanted to paint a beautiful landscape—so that’s your objective. If you’re experienced in landscape painting, it means that you’ve visited the part of the room teeming with images of landscapes. From that location, you can branch off to new areas full of landscapes that are still unimagined. But if you’re unfamiliar with landscape painting, unfortunately, you’re unlikely to create a masterpiece landscape even if that’s your objective. [[In a sense, the places we’ve visited, whether in our lives or just in our minds, are stepping stones to new ideas.]]
    * You might wonder, why didn’t the designers simply set their objective to build a fast computer in 1946? After all, we now know it’s possible. Why start so slow? But the world always works this way. Before anyone had explored the part of the great room filled with computers, no one could know what was even possible there. You have to visit before you can depart. In short, the stepping stones to faster computers were not yet known in 1946 because they had not yet been discovered, just as we do not yet know the stepping stones that may lead to computers two million times faster than today’s. Stepping stones are portals to the next level of possibility. Before we get there, we have to find the stepping stones.
    * It’s no surprise then that computer scientists even have a term, search space, that refers to this very concept—it’s the general idea that creation and discovery happen within a sp**ace of possibilities that contains stepping stones leading from one discovery to another.** The **big question when setting ambitious objectives is always whether we can find a path through this search space from where we currently are to where we want to be in the future—the path to the objective.**
    * The deeper message here is about a surprising paradox. We’ll have a lot more to say on it in later chapters, but you can get the gist of it just from what we’ve said so far: **Objectives are well and good when they are sufficiently modest, but things get a lot more complicated when they’re more ambitious. In fact, objectives actually become obstacles towards more exciting achievements, like those involving discovery, creativity, invention, or innovation— or even achieving true happiness**
    * In other words (and here is the paradox), the greatest achievements become less likely when they are made objectives. Not only that, but this paradox leads to a very strange conclusion—if the paradox is really true then the best way to achieve greatness, the truest path to “blue sky” discovery or to fulfill boundless ambition, is to have no objective at all.
    * The key problem is that the stepping stones that lead to ambitious objectives tend to be pretty strange. That is, they probably aren’t what you would predict if you were thinking only of your objective. Put another way, if you were walking through one of these great rooms of all possible things, how the items in the room are arranged would be unpredictable and confusing. History is full of examples of this vexing problem**. For example, the very first computer was built with vacuum tubes, which are devices that channel electric current through a vacuum.** However, here’s the strange part: The history of vacuum tubes has nothing to do with computers. **People like Thomas Edison who were originally interested in vacuum tubes were investigating electricity, not computing. Later, in 1904, physicist John Ambrose Fleming refined the technology to detect radio waves, still with no inkling of building a computer.** **It was only decades later that scientists first realized that vacuum tubes could help build computers, when the ENIAC was finally invented.**
    * The problem is that the stepping stone does not resemble the final product. Vacuum tubes on their own just don’t make people think about computers. But strangely enough, as history would have it vacuum tubes are right next to computers in the great room of all possible inventions—once you’ve got vacuum tubes you’re very close to having computers, if only you could see the connection. The problem is, who would think of that in advance? The arrangement, or structure, of this search space is completely unpredictable.
    * Unfortunately, this kind of unpredictability is the rule rather than the exception in almost any situation with an ambitious objective. The first engine was not invented with airplanes in mind, but of course the Wright brothers needed an engine to build a flying machine. Microwave technology was not first invented for ovens, but rather was part of magnetron power tubes that drove radars. Only when Percy Spencer first noticed the magnetron melt a chocolate bar in his pocket in 1946 did it become clear that microwaves are stepping stones to ovens.
    * These stories of delayed revelations and serendipitous discovery expose the danger of objectives: If your objective was to invent a microwave oven, you would not be working on radars. If you wanted to build a flying machine (as countless failed inventors did over the years), you wouldn’t spend the next few decades instead trying to invent an engine. If you were like Charles Babbage in the 1820s and wanted to build a computer, you wouldn’t dedicate the rest of your life to refining vacuum tube technology.
    * This paradox isn’t just about historical events. It applies just as much today as ever—to everything from society’s greatest challenges to your own personal ambitions. **Chances are that if we plan a path based on our objective, then it will miss the stepping stones.** This insight raises some troubling questions that relate to the tricky #nature of stepping stones: **Do increasing test scores really lead to subject mastery? Is the key to artificial intelligence really related to intelligence? Does taking a job with a higher salary really bring you closer to being a millionaire? Is cancer going to be cured by an insight from someone who is not a cancer researcher? Are improvements in television technology bringing us any closer to holographic television?**
    * It often turns out that the measure of success—which tells us whether we are moving in the right direction—**is deceptive because it’s blind to the true stepping stones that must be crossed.** So it makes sense to question many of our efforts on this basis. But actually the implications are even more grave than just questioning particular pursuits and their objectives. At a deeper level, we might ask why we think ambitious pursuits should be driven by objectives at all.
    * Count Basie, who was a respected name in jazz during the birth of rock and roll, described how new musical styles really come about: “If you’re going to come up with a new direction or a really new way to do something, you’ll do it by just playing your stuff and letting it ride. The real innovators did their innovating by just being themselves.” 
    * The funny thing is that not only was it completely unpredictable in the early twentieth century that jazz and blues would lead to rock and roll, but no one was even worried about it because rock and roll was not an objective. We just happened to be traveling the right path through the search space of musical genres to bump into it in the late 1940s
    * One of the biggest names in popularizing rock and roll is of course Elvis Presley. Interestingly, his unmistakable sound wasn’t planned either. Guitarist Scotty Moore recalls, “All of a sudden, Elvis just started singing this song, jumping around and acting the fool, and then Bill picked up his bass, and he started acting the fool, too, and I started playing with them. . . . [the recording engineer] stuck his head out and said, ‘What are you doing?’ And we said, ‘We don’t know [6].’ ” Who would have thought that “acting the fool,” and not some ambitious drive to overhaul popular music, would transform the world of rock and roll? The stories of Elvis and rock and roll in general illustrate that not only can objectives block discovery, but that having no objective can lead to the greatest discoveries of all.
    * However, the problem is that it’s hard to simply abandon objectives because they are a powerful security blanket. At the least they seem to protect us from the wild unknowns of the world. They give us a sense of purpose and the promise of success if only we try hard enough.
    * No doubt, the thought of aimlessly wandering through the space of possibilities with no clear purpose is not going to inspire many can-do achievers. But that is not where this argument leads. We don’t face a false choice between slavishly following objectives and aimless wandering. Instead, the true implications are both more subtle and more liberating than that. **We want to show you that it’s possible to explore a search space intelligently even without an objective. In other words, there is a third way—just because you don’t have an objective doesn’t mean you have to be wandering. We can align ourselves towards discovery and away from the trap of preconceived results.**
    * **Over the remainder of this book an important principle will begin to emerge: Sometimes the best way to achieve something great is to stop trying to achieve a particular great thing. In other words, greatness is possible if you are willing to stop demanding what that greatness should be**. While it seems like discussing objectives leads to one paradox after another, this idea really should make sense. Aren’t the greatest moments and epiphanies in life so often unexpected and unplanned? Serendipity can play an outsize role in life. There’s a reason for this pattern. **Even though serendipity is often portrayed as a happy accident, maybe it’s not always so accidental after all. In fact, as we’ll show, there’s a lot we can do to attract serendipity, aside from simply betting on random luck.**
    * We hope you’ll find this message liberating. Our world has become saturated with objectives and metrics for success that mechanize our lives and distract us from our passions. **But there are other paths to happiness and success. We’ll show you why not only can you trust your gut instinct when it tells you something important is around the corner, but you should trust it, even if you can’t explain what that something is**. You don’t need to make up a tortured reason to justify every little impulse you feel. **And not only is this attitude more healthy for us as humans anyway, but it’s backed up by solid scientific evidence that this book will present. We’re missing out on a lot by clinging to objectives.**
    * Do you ever blame yourself when you can’t achieve your highest goals despite your best efforts? Why do so many of us feel our creativity is stifled by the machinelike integration of modern society? We weren’t born for this. It isn’t healthy for us, and deep down we know that. Something is wrong at a fundamental level with the assumptions that justify where our time is invested.