---
title: "The False Compass"
date: 2022-05-10
tags:
- seed
---

### Quotes
Lakes aren’t the only place where this problem comes up. Stepping stones arise repeatedly in the discussion of Picbreeder too. In any large, uncharted search space, stepping stones represent the waypoints that must be crossed to eventually reach the objective. In fact, the term “stepping stone” is meant to remind us of this idea of crossing a lake on small stones protruding through the water. The fundamental problem of search and discovery is that we usually don’t know the stepping stones that lead to the objective at the outset. After all, if we always knew the stepping stones, then everything we hope to achieve would be easy. Because of such uncertainty, the lake we’re crossing is often shrouded in mist. In a sense, the human condition is that we’re marooned on a stepping stone with only the insight of the human mind to guide us. Though the mind is a powerful force in search, **it’s still difficult to see farther than one stepping stone away, no matter our intelligence.**

Deception is the key reason that objectives often don’t work to drive achievement. If the objective is deceptive, as it must be for most ambitious problems, then setting it and guiding our efforts by it offers little help in reaching it. However, there is an alternative to focusing on objectives. If we go back to Picbreeder for a moment, one of the most interesting things about it is that it has no final objective. It’s not aiming to discover some ultimate picture, the pinnacle of all pictures after which no other picture will ever be interesting. There’s a better way to think of Picbreeder—as a stepping-stone collector. It collects stepping stones that create the potential to find even more stepping stones. Collecting stepping stones isn’t like pursuing an objective because the stepping stones in the Picbreeder collection don’t lead to somewhere in particular. Rather, they are the road to everywhere. To arrive somewhere remarkable we must be willing to hold many paths open without knowing where they might lead. Picbreeder shows that such a system is possible.

But Picbreeder is just one example of what you might call a non-objective system of discovery. There are some much more important processes that also work in this way. To name a couple very significant ones, natural evolution and human innovation also proceed without any final objective, as we’ll see. Both of them are far more profound than Picbreeder, but it’s still striking that they follow the same non-objective principle.

Natural evolution is a process of discovery and creation that produced an astronomical diversity of exceedingly complex organisms. Much of the natural world is a product of natural evolution, from the green carpet of life spanning the globe to our very selves. The intricacy and magnitude of its creations cannot be overstated; our own brains, themselves products of evolution, include 100 trillion neural connections, far exceeding the complexity of anything designed by engineers. Interestingly, it’s popular to explain evolution as a process in which traits appear to satisfy some kind of global objective, portraying evolution only as a special sort of optimizer. However, like with Picbreeder, the truth is much deeper.

Perhaps survive and reproduce can be more naturally seen as a constraint on evolution. In other words, it’s a kind of minimal criterion that all creatures must satisfy to continue evolving. But it describes nothing about the products that might be created, nothing about the difference between where we are today and where we might be tomorrow, and nothing about the potential for greatness lurking behind it. And by viewing survival in nature as a constraint rather than as an objective we no longer have to bend words in unnatural ways.

Even so, it’s common to believe that evolution does have an objective, which is to survive and reproduce. This story of survival and reproduction is popular and supports the cultural assumption that all great achievements are driven by objectives. **But we should be careful when objective tales are spun around open ended constraints like “survive and reproduce,” because meeting a constraint is much different from what is usually meant by objective-driven achievement**

Even if your goals aren’t particularly noble, you can’t avoid the problem of deception. Maybe you just want to become rich. But as we saw from the personal stories in the last chapter, measuring success against the objective is likely to lead you on the wrong path in all sorts of situations. Deception applies to becoming rich just as everywhere else. For example, what sense would it make to decline an unpaid internship doing something you love simply because it doesn’t make you any more rich? In fact, if you do become rich, it’s probably because you did pursue your passion, not because you pursued money per se. Passion is what drives you to that point, and then one day you might realize that you are only one stepping stone away from being rich.

It’s important to understand that this lesson is not a lecture on morality, at least in the context of this book. Instead, it’s exactly the same lesson we see in nature, the same we see in human innovation, and the same we see in Picbreeder. The stepping stones don’t resemble the final destination. It has nothing to do with right and wrong. It has to do with search.

We should be concerned by the disconnect between how the world is supposed to work and the way it really does work. When we set out to achieve our dreams, we’re supposed to know what our dreams are, and to strive for them with passion and commitment. But this philosophy leads to absurdities if taken literally. You can’t evolve intelligence in a Petri dish based on measuring intelligence. You can’t build a computer simply through determination and intellect—you need the stepping stones. You can’t become rich simply by seeking a higher salary—getting a raise today doesn’t guarantee another raise will ever come in the future. There’s much we cannot achieve by trying to achieve it.