---
title: "Victory for the Aimless"
date: 2022-05-10
tags:
- sapling
---

### Quotes
In an interesting experiment by Richard Wiseman [12], subjects were asked to count the number of photographs in a newspaper. It turns out that those who focused on the goal of counting the photographs took significantly longer to complete the task than those who were less focused on the objective. Why? The more openminded participants noticed that on the inside of page two Wiseman had written, “Stop counting: There are 43 photographs in this newspaper.” **While some might say that noticing the answer on page two is only luck, the deeper lesson is that focusing too much on your goal can actually prevent you from making useful unexpected discoveries**

 The bestselling novelist John Grisham first trained and practiced as a criminal defense attorney for ten years. The trigger for his career change was particular testimony that he overheard one day from a young rape victim. Somehow that testimony made him realize that he should and could write, and he began waking early in the morning before work to gradually complete his first novel, A Time to Kill [14]. His next book, The Firm, would spend 47 weeks on the New York Times bestseller list. Most aspiring writers would not choose law school to develop their craft. Reading endless case studies in a dusty library seems like poor preparation compared to practicing creative writing. But maybe that’s why it worked for John Grisham. **He wasn’t following a plan.**

In fact, that seems to be a pretty good strategy if you want to be a writer. Before Harry Potter sold millions of copies, J.K. Rowling was a bilingual secretary for Amnesty International and then taught English to students learning it as a second language in Portugal [15]. Haruki Murakami, the Japanese writer behind such award-winning reveries as The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle and Kafka on the Shore, first ran a combination coffee house and jazz bar. Murakami himself is convinced that without running the bar he never would have become a writer because it gave him the time to observe and brood. Many of his characters later shared his fondness for jazz. Interestingly, it didn’t occur to Murakami that he could write novels until he was 29

Of course there are always the guardians of objective thinking who want to thwart our deeper desires. They’ll tell us to be practical and set more realistic objectives. For some reason, musicians seem to confront this problem a lot. John Lennon’s mother provided this bit of wisdom: “The guitar’s all very well, John, but you’ll never make a living out of it [19].” Elton John faced similar advice from his father, who wanted to talk him out of his “implausible wish to become a ‘star’ [20].” The pressure to choose realistic objectives is familiar to all of us. Just think of the common saying, “Get your head out of the clouds.” While the pressure to be practical clearly affects musicians, their stories reflect a wider cultural assumption: Following a path for its raw attraction is sillier than following it for its practicality. 

The common thread in all these tales is that the successful wander from their original paths, whether those paths were chosen by themselves or others. Somehow, what seemed originally the right objective became merely a stepping stone to a different horizon.

You might think these kinds of stories only apply to the luckiest of the lucky. But serendipity isn’t actually so picky. A peer-reviewed study found that nearly two thirds of adults attribute some aspect of their career choice to serendipity [22]. As one participant put it, “I happened to visit an animal hospital and became interested in veterinary medicine.” You never know what hidden passion you might unexpectedly discover. 

Note the emphasis on unplanned experience. 

Who would have thought that so many disparate scenarios would follow this strange yet fundamental principle? The key is to be open to change, to a shifting landscape where appearances can be deceiving yet liberating at the same time. The great achievers are willing to abandon their original objectives and spring for opportunity when it arises. What is important in these scenarios is to avoid locking into rigid commitment to the original ambitious objective, and instead remaining mindful and open to where the present stepping stone might lead. Sometimes all it takes is sensing potential—whether it be in becoming a musician or finding a new way to cook—even if the true nature of that potential is still unknown.

For example, the (now) videogame company Nintendo also took a winding path to its success. Founded in 1889, for years Nintendo made a modest profit selling traditional Japanese playing cards. Later in the 1960s, as the playing card market collapsed, the company nearly went bankrupt trying out new business ventures like running a taxi service, building shortstay “love hotels,” manufacturing instant rice, and selling toys. The manager of the new toys and games division, Hiroshi Imanishi, hired a group of amateur weekend tinkerers to brainstorm products. When one of the tinkerers created an extendable mechanical toy hand, Hiroshi was impressed and released it as the “Ultra Hand.” The product’s huge commercial success prompted the company to abandon its nontoy ventures. Later Nintendo began to explore electronic toys, eventually leading it to become the iconic video game company behind “Super Mario Brothers [