**Governance Meeting**
ðŸ•’ Date: Thu Dec 7 at 11:00 PM UTC ðŸ‘¥ Participants: pruitt,rd,aiden3 chen,kaleb w.rasmussen,bsturisky3,cole,manny,jhweintraub,aidan3 chen,rikagoldberg628,ronithry ðŸ—’ Transcript: [See full transcipt](https://app.fireflies.ai/view/Weekly-Governance-Meeting::vKzgyCYeLG2TVQwe)

Source: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZRPDVZu9itCSVpMUiiLVCp9u6q-lrZSJLeWdoZeFE1o/edit?usp=sharing

==Governance Redesign (Internal 404, Jack is working on this)==
==Experimental Incentive System for Arbitrum DAO Delegates - write up our voting rationale==
[https://snapshot.org/#/arbitrumfoundation.eth/proposal/0xef3ed3b3735cad375953947437980db576baebbba5a0c209b2cccabcb1c30740](https://snapshot.org/#/arbitrumfoundation.eth/proposal/0xef3ed3b3735cad375953947437980db576baebbba5a0c209b2cccabcb1c30740)**
==Data driven analysis for STIP - Manny maybe working on this. Maybe could use POIDH to create a bounty to source sql/data doors lol to work on this. 

1. Jack mentioned that he is working on a governance redesign to increase accountability and incentives for the team. He plans to discuss it with each team member individually and then as a group to decide on the next steps.
    
2. Pruitt mentioned a live vote on an incentive system for active delegates in Arbitrum. It was suggested that the team familiarize themselves with the proposal and potentially provide comments on it.

Forum Post: https://forum.arbitrum.foundation/t/proposal-experimental-incentive-system-for-active-arbitrumdao-delegates/19467/20

Snapshot:
[https://snapshot.org/#/arbitrumfoundation.eth/proposal/0xef3ed3b3735cad375953947437980db576baebbba5a0c209b2cccabcb1c30740](https://snapshot.org/#/arbitrumfoundation.eth/proposal/0xef3ed3b3735cad375953947437980db576baebbba5a0c209b2cccabcb1c30740)
 

Write up our voting rationale.

3. Jack asked if anyone had read the Uniswap proposal and suggested that the team abstain from voting until more information is gathered.
    
4. Rika mentioned a comment from Aaron in the Uniswap forum, where he suggested delegates check the parse function calls on Tally or pull the call data from Agora to confirm the vote and ensure it aligns with the intended action.
    
5. Pruitt mentioned the need to structure the Arbitrum governance and proposed the idea of implementing seasons similar to other protocols. It was suggested to bring this up in the RFC and explore other models used by different DAOs for inspiration.
    
6. Manny expressed the need for more structure in Arbitrum to address delegate fatigue and lack of organization. He suggested considering a break and reflection period between seasons to allow for learning and improvements.
    
7. Pruitt suggested looking into the structure used by other DAOs, such as Optimism and Uniswap, and formulating a vision and goals to contribute more effectively.
    
8. Rika offered to go through the AI notes from the meeting to ensure that the action items discussed are not lost. Please note that this is not an exhaustive list, and there may be other follow-ups and action items mentioned in the transcript.
    

07:22

  

Yeah. I mean, if they could even do like June or something. But it may be also, since we're talking about STIP, Kurt and I met on Monday to talk through what data driven analysis for STIP and its effectiveness would look like. If anyone knows SQL. Caleb on the call. Yeah. So if anyone knows SQL or wants to help with that would be good. It's honestly a lot of work. So we decided on six to seven protocols. I honestly don't know when I'll have time for that at the current moment, but it'd be a lot easier if someone else could.Â 

  

Yeah, you have to be familiar with blockchain data. It would probably be too difficult if you haven't worked with Dune before, unless you're just really invested all the time. But yeah, we're pretty much just going to look at unique or like existing users versus new users before and after stip. Eventually looking at the cost per user per protocol would be good. Or like user acquisition metric. To see the total R distributed to date divided by the number of new users would be a good metric. So stuff like that.Â 

  

Ryan DeMattia

11:46

It'd also be interesting to see it in transaction volume and fee volume. If we think of the idea of like, they're basically buying and selling block space.Â 

Summary

- Jack Sanniota and Pruitt Martin discuss their roles in an upcoming project related to Belgium. They also talk about scheduling conflicts and rescheduling a Porsche launch. Manny Jonson
    

**