#essay 
#authors [[chad wellmon]]
https://thepointmag.com/examined-life/degrees-of-anxiety/

#Questions
How can the trait of overconfidence help people achieve goals?
People who are overconfident are not honest. They tend to use deceit to get their desires. But this can backfire. 

How can people actually attain necessary skills? Coursera certificates are one way. Mindfulness like DAOWei assuming you don't know is another way and then becoming a student. 

In their responses, there were two distinct threads. **First, they wrote clearly and confidently about their own skills, crafts and trades, but initially hesitated to describe these as knowledge.** They were reluctant to claim that honorific for themselves or their work. **But once I introduced the term, with the help of texts from Plato, Descartes and Tressie McMillan Cottom,** they began to recognize themselves. **They also began to identify their place in the systems and hierarchies that structured not only their own lives but also the workplaces and institutions in which they found themselves: knowledge versus technique, task versus craft, profession versus job, educated versus uneducated.** Second, when they addressed _college_, the language and tone of their responses shifted sharply. The excited crescendo of long, ebullient sentences broke, collapsing into simple declaratives such as “I don’t have a B.A.” and “I can’t get a promotion because I don’t have a degree.” **Instead of recognizing what they did possess, they described what they lacked. College, for them, was neither an institution nor a social filter; it was an individual failure and the source of personal shame.**

When we talked about knowledge, these students expressed pride and a sense of dignity in what they could do; they reveled in the possibility of seeing things differently. When we talked about college, they expressed alienation and shame. **It wasn’t just that college and knowledge weren’t the same thing; it was that they were active antagonists. College was a threat to the joy in reading texts they’d never encountered, the testing of arguments, the sharing of discoveries and the pleasures and satisfactions of thinking and talking collectively and rigorously.**

Recently, I was prompted to reflect back on my own reasons for going to college when I found a cheap paperback behind the Dichter und Denker editions on my bookshelves. The book was T. Z. Lavine’s From Socrates to Sartre: The Philosophic Quest, a mass-market paperback based on a television series that ran on Maryland’s Public Broadcasting Station in 1979. **A philosophy professor who taught at George Mason University and had studied under American pragmatists like Ralph Barton Perry and C. I. Lewis at Harvard, Lavine wanted to reclaim literature, philosophy and knowledge from college professors who hoarded it for themselves and return it to everyone.** She told a Boston Globe reporter that ten years after the series had first aired, people still wrote her to say thank you or to describe how reading Plato had changed their life. “There seems to be a hunger for this kind of programming,” Lavine said. The Globe article continued: 

**She says if Socrates were around today he’d probably be on television. No cloistered ivory-tower type, he. The man was out there, talking, ticking people off, and ultimately dying for his ideas.** 

They’re not drinking the hemlock in America, but some are definitely sticking their necks out, raising the blood pressure of traditionalists who feel a philosopher’s place is in the university, period. The move out of the academy has come in the past ten years, partly because of liberal-arts budget cutting and partly because this wacky world could use a few good thinkers.

The irony of the various discourses about college is how consistently they deflect attention away from the joys of learning, the satisfactions of scholarship or the importance of truth-seeking. College chatter tranquilizes intellectual desire. The alienation, anxiety and anger of the undergraduates, adult learners and graduate students with whom I’ve worked point, I think, to a widely felt gap between what we imagine college to be and what college actually does. Even more than “the university,” “college” names a desire for intellectual community, excellence in thinking and the intrinsic goods of learning, knowing and thinking. But it also names the particular experience of anxiety, alienation and anger of those whose capacity to attain social status, credentials, professional success and financial security is often felt to be obstructed by college. When credentials, money, prestige, professional success or social reform are made direct goals of college, mediate ends are made immediate ones. But this process of deflection is so widespread that it now affects not only the discourse about college but also, for most of us, the experience of it.

I don’t think the undergraduate students or “adult learners” whom I’ve met would join faculty, graduate students and postdocs to fight for college, much less the university. But I like to think they might well join us to fight for new forms of intellectual community. The “adult learners” I met recently renewed my hope. Having opted out of the credentialing game, they live in the shadow of a failed deflection and have decided to care about something new. Like deflection, the process of “aspiration,” as Agnes Callard explains in her book of that title, refers not just to something we do but also to the way our ideas about an activity shape our experience of it. But unlike deflection, aspiration generates new desires and new loves; instead of making our lives more manageable, it fills them with possibilities we have only begun to grasp. As those of us who work for colleges and universities organize, my bigger, utopian hope is that we fight not simply on behalf of a profession and in defense of monopolies of status, but rather alongside everyone who aspires to know and understand our dappled world.