#article 
#institutions [[time magazine]]
#authors [[raisa bruner]]
#toprocess 
https://time.com/6153320/crypto-ukraine-charity/

A fashion designer turned renegade web3 creator, Viltrakyte is no stranger to the contentious politics of Eastern Europe; she was entangled in a 2013 lawsuit against her native Lithuania over free speech in her brand’s advertising, which ultimately went to the European Court of Human Rights. (She won.) The NFT project she now helms is even appropriately called The Rebels. 

After getting in touch with Ukrainian friends and connections, she started by converting about $15,000 in Ethereum to Bitcoin and donating personally to SaveLife.in.UA, or Come Back Alive, a Ukraine-based military charity that accepts BTC; it was the main group she could find that already had a public cryptocurrency wallet set up. Viltrakyte was not alone in her eagerness to contribute crypto to the Ukrainian cause. By Tuesday, the amount of crypto raised for Ukraine-based aid had surpassed $30 million, across a number of funds and efforts. One group even raised the equivalent of $1 million in a mere 30 seconds.

In Kyiv, Vitaliy Deynega, founder of Come Back Alive, is hard at work managing the many millions of dollars that are flowing into his organization’s coffers. A well-recognized Ukrainian charity with over 3 million followers on Facebook, his group buys equipment for the army: radios, drones, thermal night-vision setups. They set up an open crypto wallet about a year ago, and with the influx in support over the past week—both in crypto and fiat currency—they’ve already bought thousands of pieces of equipment for immediate distribution. “It was not that popular,” Deynega says of the crypto option in the past. “Not all that useful. But right now, in this hot stage of the war, it is extremely useful.” Sometimes, they don’t even have to convert the crypto to Euros, but can make purchases directly. Transacting solely in digital currency is not new to Ukrainians; Deynega references a banking system that supports transferring funds between bank cards. “Now instead of this banking card thing, we have this crypto thing, which gives us more flexibility because it’s international,” he says.

To those working in web3—the next wave of decentralized virtual and digital platforms—the tendency of the community towards global philanthropy is natural. According to Pat Duffy, co-founder of donations platform The Giving Block, crypto-based giving has been steadily on the rise: a new study from Fidelity Charitable reports that “donor contributions of digital assets like Bitcoin soared nearly twelvefold over the previous year, totaling more than $330 million in total contributions in 2021.” Nearly half of crypto donors were likely to give $1,000 or more, compared to only 33% of all investors. And while Viltrakyte may have struggled to find crypto-friendly causes to contribute to during the first day of the conflict, Ukraine quickly realized the opportunity at hand: even the government opened up options for direct crypto donations.

Now, an ecosystem of platforms and crypto funds have popped up to facilitate these transfers. The Giving Block enables individuals to donate Bitcoin, Ethereum, or any of a wide list of crypto tokens to vetted humanitarian aid charities working in Ukraine—like Direct Relief and Save the Children—or to contribute to a general cause fund with a bundle of charities. “We reduce the amount of time nonprofits need to spend in this arena in order to fundraise effectively,” says Duffy. “And on the donor side, we build the connective tissue, the rails to nonprofits.” The goal: simplify giving.

Twitter in particular has been central to organizing. One of the buzzier donation efforts developed on that network. RELI3F was concocted by a hodgepodge of NFT enthusiasts: artists around the world, online community facilitators, and the popular Twitter connector Andrew Wang. Within a day, their collective launched a fund with 37 artists contributing NFT works; sales totaled over $1 million in less than a minute of the auction going live. They’ve directly wired about half of that to three causes that directly accept ETH—Come Back Alive, local media vetted by the Kyiv Independent, and medical group Hospitallers—while holding the other half as “priorities may shift,” they tweeted, and they want to be able to allocate to most-pressing needs in the days ahead. (Helpfully, anyone curious about how these donations are funneled can follow the blockchain trail by checking wallet addresses and viewing Etherscan transaction histories. While the donation pipeline has often been opaque in traditional philanthropy, crypto-based donations are transparent by #nature.)

On Monday evening, RELI3F coordinator Wang pulled together an impromptu Zoom with a dozen of the fund’s primary organizers and artist-contributors to discuss their work so far. “It’s not just about fungible tokens, or crypto making its way to another part of the world,” he said. “It’s because we have these social norms of helping each other and knowing each other and doing right by each other. All of our reputations are on the line for this. We lead with art.”

One of the most successful funds so far is UkraineDAO. Founded in part by Russian performance artist and activist Nadya Tolokonnikova—best known as one of the founding members of Pussy Riot—UkraineDAO raised over $4.2 million for Come Back Alive within three days of launching its first NFT collection, including from high-profile donors like Ethereum co-founder Vitalik Buterin, OnlyFans (responsible for a 500 ETH donation, about $1.5 million), and Reddit’s Alexis Ohanian. Donors can either donate crypto directly to the fund or invest in a “LOVE” token. “These tokens have NO utility nor value, but are a beautiful testament and reminder of your contribution to a noble cause,” the UkraineDAO website warns. For many crypto investors, the symbolism is worth the cost.

The blockchain is ultimately just ones and zeros; it’s inherently and permanently neutral, even in the face of war, and is just starting to prove itself as an efficient tool to move funds around the world fast, sidestepping the bureaucracy of our fiat currency institutions.