---
title: "How Twitter Gamifies Communication"
date: 2022-10-02
tags:
- sapling
---

https://philpapers.org/archive/NGUHTG.pdf

### Highlights
I would like to focus on another basic feature of Twitter —one whose importance and impacts, I think, has not been adequately appreciated. Twitter gamifies communication by offering immedi-ate, vivid, and quantified evaluations of one’s conversational success.

Twitter is addictive, in part, because it feels so good to watch those numbers go up and up. In fact, the design of Twitter and its scoring mechanisms have been significantly informed by design strategies fostered in the Las Vegas gam-bling industry —strategies which overtly seek to increase the addictiveness of their products.

The clear scoring system brings with it another very game-like aspect: a clear and unambiguous ranking. We usually don’t emerge from the party with a ranked list of who the best 2This pattern of thought has been particularly influenced by Tufekci’s (2018) discussion of how the Internet era has democratized communication, but at the same time subjected all online communication to a few very small portals. The Internet is democratic because anybody can put up a web-page, but it is mono-lithic because we all find web-pages using Google Search -so Google Search’s algorithm becomes an all powerful control on our collective attention.

Obviously, in the background, is Marshall McLuhan’s (McLuhan, 1964) discussion of the impact of medium over content.3Natasha Dow Schull’s Addiction by Design(2012) offers a thorough look at the technological innovations of the gambling industry to optimize the addictiveness of their products. Since that book, Schull has been vo-cal about how those technologies have been adopted by gaming and social media companies (Madrigal, 2013; National Public Radio, 2014; Seymour, 2019).

Supporters of gamification say that it is a technology for increasing motivation. Gamifi-cation cansupposedlyimbue everyday activities with all the fun and excitement of a game.4Here, then, is an optimistic view of Twitter: by gamifying public discourse, Twitter increases overall participation, and so helps us to reap the rewards of public discourse —such as a more fully politically engaged populace.

I do not accept the optimistic view. Crucially, I don’t think that gamification merely in-creases our motivation to perform an activity while preserving all the original goods of that activity. Gamification increases our motivation by changing the [#nature](app://obsidian.md/index.html#nature) of the activity. Often, the goals of ordinary activity are rich and subtle. When we gamify these activities, we change those goals to make them artificially clear. Games are more satisfying than ordinary life pre-cisely because game-goals are simpler, clearer, and easier to apply.

Pre-gamification, the aims of discourse are complex and many. Some of us want to transmit information or to persuade; some of us want friendship. Some of us want to join together in the pursuit of truth and understanding. Twitter gamifies discourse and, in so doing, offers us re-engineered goals for our communicative acts. Twitter invites us to shift our values along its pre-fabricated lines. We start to chase higher Likes and Retweets and Follower counts — and those are very different targets.

What’s more, the effect of Twitter’s gamification, across the community Twitter users, will tend towards levelling and flattening the diversity of values.

**Gamification homogenizes the value landscape.

And this phenomenon will help explain some of the more socially toxic aspects of Twitter. The technology invites us to focus our cares on the narrow task of getting points and going viral. And that goal is in tension with our interest in having morally sensitive and openhearted communication.**

Of course, Twitter isn’t the only place where gamification influences communication, discourse, and collective understanding. We can see similar effects with Facebook’s Likes, YouTube’s clickthrough and watchthrough counts,5 academic citation rates, and more. But here I wish to explore, in details, how gamification impacts discourse and knowledge-production in one particular instantiation, as an opening step towards understanding life in the time of quantification.

The answer seems to lie in the powerful feedback and reward mechanisms available in games, especially contemporary computer games. In such games, we are given immediate rewards for our achievements in the form of points, leveling up, achievement badges, and the like. Games quantize our successes, making our progress clear and vivid.

McGonigal emphasizes, in particular, how games offer us a steady sense of progress and victory, through a constant stream of clear feedback, in the terms of the accumulation of points (52-63).7 So why can’t we borrow those feedback and reward mechanisms, and slather them over real-life activities?

Disney famously gamified its hospitality 7 The mechanisms for this are complex. McGonigal provides a survey of the empirical literature; for a more pessimistic counterpoint, see Schull’s work on game addiction and its relationship to points. Schull’s account stresses the way in which the exact timing of the quantized reward in certain game designs triggers addictive surges of serotonin. 7 workforce, providing leaderboards and rankings for speedy performance. Notably, the system increased productivity, at the expense of also increasing the injury rate. And workers hated the system, calling it the “electronic whip” — and saying that they couldn’t help being motivated by it, even though they detested the intrusion.

When we understand the source of gamification’s motivational power, we will see the problem with McGonigal’s optimism. Gamification involves a trade: it increases our motivation in an activity by narrowing and simplifying the target of that activity — which, in turn, changes the [#nature](app://obsidian.md/index.html#nature) of the activity. And this may be fine when the activity has a naturally simple target, as is possibly the case with language learning. But the goals of discourse are many and subtle, and gamification threatens to destroy much of that diversity and subtlety.

And the game player submerges themselves in this sculpted agency, temporarily. Gameplaying involves the temporary adoption of an alternate set of goals. Why do all this? For one thing, our goals in game-life are so much clearer than in ordinary life. In ordinary life, our goals are often obscure. We often don’t know exactly what we’re doing — or we find our reasons hard to articulate and difficult to apply. And we are beset with a confusing welter of values – both from within our own value system, and from the bruising value complexity of the social world. But games offer a relief from all that. While playing a game, we know exactly what we are trying to do — and afterwards, we know exactly how well we have done. Success in a game is clear and unmistakable. There are points.

And game values usually fit neatly with one another. In ordinary life, our values are hard 8 The present account relies on material drawn from Nguyen (2017; 2018; 2020). 9 to balance. I care about spending time with my loved ones, raising my children right, writing good philosophy, enjoying myself in rock climbing, staying healthy, and eating delicious food. Not only are my values often in tension, but there is usually no way to precisely compare them. How do I compare achievements under one of these goals against sacrifices in another? What, exactly, is the cost-benefit analysis for choosing between working today or taking my children to the aquarium? But with games, there is usually a clear central currency of value. A game tells me to achieve victory points and then tells me exactly how many victory points things are worth.9 The goods of a game are readily commensurable, by design.

In ordinary life, values are often inchoate, subtle, and difficult to apply. But in games, values are easy. Games offer us a momentary experience of value clarity. They are a balm for the existential pains of real life. In games, we know exactly what we are doing and why we are doing it. And when we are done, we know exactly how well we have done. Games offer us a momentary respite from the value confusion of the world.

It is relatively easy for the game designer to create value clarity, because the values in games are entirely artificial. The game designer can just tell us what to care about, and players simply care about it for a while. This is part of what it means to say that agency is the medium of games. The in-game agencies — their abilities, their motivations — are the plastic medium which the game artist manipulates to achieve their effects. But when we seek to gamify ordinary life, we are trying to impose value clarity on a pre-existing thicket of values.

This is the worry with Twitter. Twitter can grant us the emotional security and existential 9 Some other games offer a few different currencies of success, but even then, those various currencies are usually compatible. In many computer role-playing games, for example, I am offered both experience points and gold, with no clear explanation of which I am to pursue. Though there is no direct exchange rate between the two currencies, they go hand-in-hand. Usually the path to more experience points is through more gold, and vice versa. So for success I can aim to maximize both. 10 relief of value clarity, but we must adopt Twitter’s narrowed targets in exchange.

Consider some of our ordinary goals for communication. We may wish to collectively pursue truth and understanding, or to promote empathy for one another. But Twitter’s scoring mechanism invites us to replace those values with another, much simpler goal: that of maximizing one’s Likes, Retweets, and Follower counts. Twitter’s measures are a radically simplified — and quite impoverished — rendition of the wide plurality of values for communication we might hope to find across a community of conversers.

For one thing, we have evidence aplenty that what makes something go viral is not its truth, or the degree to which it promotes understanding. Recent studies have shown that tweets loaded with strong moral emotions, like outrage, are far more likely to go viral, via an effect that researchers call “moral contagion” (Brady et. al., 2017)

But being guided by an aggregate measure of the audience’s approval is a far cry from being guided by one’s own internal sense of value. First, pressing Like is a quick reaction. It typically records a user’s positive first-impression response to a tweet. So if we evaluated our communicative attempts by their Like counts, we would be effectively biased in favor of tweets that users immediately enjoy.

We would be effectively biased against slow-burn content — against those ideas that lingered in the memory and revealed their depths slowly. It seems far more likely that a user will Like a tweet if it, say, expresses a view that they already agree with, than one that presents a challenging or subtle view that the user will have to 12 wrestle with for a while. This is not because tweets somehow can’t be profound by their very [#nature](app://obsidian.md/index.html#nature). Rather, it is a feature of how Twitter’s interface captures the data to feed its metrics. A user might eventually come to appreciate a challenging tweet, but they are far less likely to go back and find that tweet, weeks later, to press Like. Slow appreciation is far less likely to be captured by the system and be counted towards that tweet’s score. And insofar as we have become gamified, then we will judge our own communicative success in terms of that recorded score.

Pre-gamification, each tweeting user will be motivated by their own particular values in communicating, giving us a diversity of communicators with different and distinctive motives. Such a diversity of interests is quite healthy, epistemically speaking. Cognitively diverse communities do better at figuring things out. Suppose, now, that the entire community succumbs to gamification and starts chasing popularity by Twitter’s metric. Post-gamification, we have a body of communicators identically motivated to satisfy the same mixed populace. We’ve replaced a diversity of motivations with a motivational monolith. (Here’s one way to make the damage apparent: imagine the difference between a world of artists each motivated by their own aesthetic sensibility, versus a world of artists each motivated to satisfy the largest number of their fellow artists.

Of course, gamification might not be dangerous if it is managed properly. Here, then, is a more sophisticated defense for the gamification optimist. Perhaps the simplified, gamified value isn’t actually replacing our original value, but simply functioning as a short-term heuristic for that value. Cognitively limited beings like us often need to focus on a short-term proxy for a complex value – like, say, using one’s increased running mileage as a proxy for health, or using one’s grades as a proxy for educational success. Managed properly, such heuristics can serve as an efficient and motivating proxy for some deeper and more complex value. It’s much easier, on a day-to-day basis, to aim at increasing mileage than it is to think about my health as a whole.

But proper management is key. Heuristics, after all, are simplifications of the real thing. They are good heuristics insofar they remain properly tethered to our deeper values. The successful use of a heuristic involves a complex process of management. We need to step back and reflect on whether using the heuristic is actually helping to achieve the underlying values. Increasing your running mileage might sometimes be a good proxy for fitness, but not when it brings irreversible knee damage. We need to adjust our heuristics when they drift.

Twitter’s interface comes with a pre-fabricated, hard-wired measure, which points its users firmly in the direction of popularity – rather than allowing the user to search out the heuristic that best matches their own interests. Of course, a user could, conceivably, resist the pull of Twitter’s design for gamification and impose their own self-created and selfmanaged heuristics on their tweeting. Twitter isn’t actually forcing a value change on us. The system design is seductive, but not compulsory. But Twitter offers us an intoxicating hedonic reward for changing our values along its pre-arranged lines.

These thoughts about pre-fabrication points the way to another worry. To provide the kind of carefully engineered, automated, steady feedback that McGonigal praises, we usually 14 See McGonigal’s (2011, especially 52-63) discussion of World of Warcraft, and the importance of the visible and steady trickle of points and rewards. 17 need help from large institutions – like corporations and governments. Our choice of activities – and the way we engage in those activities – will then depend deeply on the fabrication efforts of large-scale institutions.

When you engage in a particular gamified activity, you will, indeed, find yourself more motivated and more engaged. But you will also be restricted to choosing from the list of activities that institutions have chosen to gamify for you. Right now, for example, there are popular gamifications available for language learning, increasing your step counts, and tracking your weight loss. But there aren’t good gamifications for learning to appreciate complex poetry or becoming a better and more empathetic listener. And even if we think that the choice of gamifications isn’t insidious or manipulative – even if the institutions are well-intentioned and just trying to help us lead our best lives – we will still find that the range of activities available to us will be sharply curtailed.

Institutions will tend to produce gamifications of activities that more easily admit of technologized measurement. It is easier to gamify weight-loss than it is to gamify deep aesthetic appreciation, because the former is easier to measure in an automated way. And when institutions gamify activities with more subtle and complex aims – like communication – then they will tend to tend to change those activities to make the aims more amenable to automated measurement.

Ironically, if we took the spirit of play to involve something like some kind of freedom or spontaneity with respect to one’s values and activities, then gamification turns out 18 to be the opposite of play.

There is now a further question: how might gamification change the users themselves? How might they transform the users’ lasting values?

Real games have special properties. As Johann Huizinga famously put it, a game occurs in a separated place — a place he called “the magic circle” — where we take on alternate roles, and our actions took on alternate meanings (Huizinga, 1971). Or, as Annika Waern puts it, games take place inside an interpretive frame, where we agree to reinterpret the meanings of the acts inside the game (Waern, 2012). These are philosophically rich descriptions of a familiar phenomenon. Actions in games are screened off, in important ways, from ordinary life. When we are playing basketball, and you block my pass, I do not take this to be a sign of your long-term hostility towards me. When we are playing at having an insult contest, we don’t take each other’s speech to be indicative of our actual attitudes or beliefs about the world.

But those aren’t the normative conventions around most of Twitter. The majority of Twitter presents itself as, and is taken to be, ordinary discourse.

For the most part, we think that people on Twitter are representing their real beliefs and trying to make claims about the actual world.18 A user who approaches Twitter as a literal game, then, runs the risk of undermining the epistemic goods available to the other users. Suppose I’m on Twitter to actually communicate about ideas, and you’re playing a game with Twitter — saying whatever it takes to get the most Likes and Retweets for the sheer fun of it. If I don’t realize you’re playing a game, then I will be profoundly misinformed by your tweets.

Those who approach Twitter explicitly as a game, but don’t clearly mark themselves as game-players, are conversing in bad faith. They are presenting themselves as engaging in a discursive, epistemic practice while actually being guided by non-epistemic motives. And, insofar as other Twitter users take game-playing users as serious participants in sincere discourse, then these others will be mistaking gaming talk for serious testimony.

Twitter is a part of a larger phenomenon here, which we can call value capture.20 Value capture occurs when: 1. Our natural values are rich, subtle, and hard-to-express. 2. We are placed in a social or institutional setting which presents simplified, typically quantified, versions of our values back to ourselves. 3. The simplified versions take over in our motivation and deliberation.

**Some examples: starting to exercise for the sake of your health, then getting captured by FitBit and coming to just care about your daily step-counts. Going to school for the sake of a good education and coming out obsessed your GPA. Becoming a pre-law for the sake of public interest and legal activism, and then coming to care more about getting admitted to the best law school according the US News & World Report’s law school rankings.21 And, of course, going onto Twitter for the sake of communication, connection, and shared understanding — and coming out obsessed with maximizing Likes, Retweets, and Follower counts. And, obviously, a high step-count isn’t the same as good health; a high GPA isn’t the same as a good education; and high Twitter Likes aren’t the same as connection or collective understanding.**

Rather, it’s that the kind of metrics, measures, and gamified scoring that we typically encounter in our life with bureaucracies, institutions, and corporations are almost always radical simplifications of the values they claim to be measuring. Those simplifications may have certain uses in administration, management, or large-scale scientific data-collection. But what makes them useful for those functions is, in fact, their very simplification.

It’s useful here to borrow from a nearby discussion: that of the simplifications involved in bureaucratic quantifications. As Theodore Porter puts it, institutional quantification is driven by an interest in making information highly portable. Rich, nuanced qualitative information is difficult to manage from any sort of informational center. We need to strip out the context-sensitive details and nuance in order to transmit it easily between contexts (Porter, 1996). This is why such quantification is beloved of centralized bureaucracies, which need to pass information to distant managers, and up many levels in the hierarchy of administration

So teachers are asked to provide quantified grades for their students, which can then easily be averaged across classes for one students, and across all the students in a department, university, 22 I am also influenced here by (Perrow, 2014; Merry, 2016). 23 or school district. Quantified grades strip out much of the most important information. But that context-stripping renders information into a standardized form that can be operated upon arithmetically. This allows managers of massive, sprawling institutions to bring their entire domain into view — by putting information in standardized form and then aggregating it. Institutional life exerts a pressure on information, pushing it towards quantified, aggregable form. Notice that these forces do not typically arise to support our individual interests, but instead the interests of management and large-scale administration

But, problematically, those quantifications appeal to our motivations precisely because of their apparent clarity. And once we offer simple, quantified metrics for success, those metrics take over in the motivations of so many people.

A similar pressure occurs with overt gamifications, especially ones in an automated, technological context — though the motivations for simplifying may be slightly different. In order to create the motivational rewards of gamification, we need to provide a score. In order to provide that score, we need to offer reliable scoring mechanism. And in a large-scale, technologized context like Twitter, that scoring mechanism needs to function automatically. Twitter can’t offer a score based on quality of engagement, empathy, or depth of thought. It can only score us on what is easily legible to its systems: like whether or not somebody clicks on Like

Similarly, Twitter’s scores, once rendered into quantified form, can be extracted and used to generate other scores.24 For example, the explicitly gamified social network Empire.kred creates a second-order game out of social media scores. Empire.kred is a virtual stock market, where individuals are the stocks. Individuals can invest in each other using the game’s virtual currency, $Eaves. Their stock value is based on their social media power, as modified through investments. Empire.kred harvests various scores from other social media networks — like Twitter and Facebook, and then aggregates those scores to drive its virtual stock market.25 This is possible because those social media networks have already digested evaluations of user success into a standardized and portable format: a numerical score.

The problem with value capture can be put most clearly if we help ourselves to an assumption. There is, it is often thought, a natural aim to belief. Belief aims at the truth.26 We can be tempted by other motivations to abandon that aim: to believe what will feel pleasant or make things easy for us. But to do so is to abandon the natural aim of belief; it is to subvert the activity of believing. The activity of earnest discourse also seems to have a natural aim, which is the collective pursuit of truth.

We aim to express what we think of as true, and to question and challenge each other’s expressions, as part of our quest to understand the world. But gamification tempts us to change our goals — to aim at expressions which maximize our score, rather than those which aid our collective understanding. And it promises to reward us for that change with pleasure. Twitter tempts us to subvert the activity of earnest conversation for hedonistic reasons.

Here’s what that might look like. Suppose one wanted public influence. A resource for public influence is having a Twitter account with a wide number of followers — and tweets which are heavily retweeted will reach a large number of people. So one could aim for high scores simply as an approximate measure of that instrumental resource. Such a value-independent user wouldn’t have any form of change of value or goals, either short-term, or longterm. They also wouldn’t be subject to the motivational boosts that arise from more fully inhabiting the scores of Twitter. They would be holding those scores at phenomenal arm’s length. Such a user, then, would be free of the more pernicious effects of value capture and game-playing. They have resisted Twitter’s invitation to gamification.

Thinking about the value-independent user helps us get clearer on what’s wrong with the value-captured user. The value-independent user manages the scores, where the value-captured user is driven by the scores. Consider, by way of analogy, two relationships you could have with money. First, you could view it as an instrumental resource, to be collected in pursuit of some other value. Second, you could treat it as an enduring end, to be pursued for its own sake. Somebody who sought money as an instrumental resource would manage their pursuit of money in view of their larger ends. Somebody who pursued money as an instrumental resource to happiness, wouldn’t take that high-paying job that would destroy their happiness. They would manage their pursuit of money, making sure to pursue money only to the extent that it actually helped their happiness. The person who pursues money for its own sake, however, has no such guiding purpose with which to manage their pursuit of the greatest pile.

Similarly, consider a user who comes to Twitter for the sake of, say, social progress, and sought Followers and Retweets simply as an instrumental resource for their mission. They have an external standpoint from which to manage their pursuit of Followers and Retweets. They wouldn’t say anything in order to go viral, for many such things they could say would likely undermine their larger purpose. But the person who has been fully value-captured by Twitter’s scores has no such limitation. They will be driven to say whatever it takes to go viral and get those points.

For the value-independent user, Twitter’s scores are merely a means. But for the valuecaptured user, Twitter’s scores have become the end.

As I have argued elsewhere, Suits’ account reveals the possibility of a very peculiar motivational structure.29 There are two different motivational structures for playing a game. One could be an achievement player, who plays the game for the value of winning. Or one could be a striving player, who takes on a temporary interest in winning for the sake of engagement in a struggle. (One could also play for both motivations, in varying proportions.) Striving play is a very special motivational structure; it involves a motivational inversion from ordinary life. In ordinary life, we take the means for the sake of achieving the ends. But in game life, we select the ends for the sake of the means.

When my spouse and I play games, we want to both have a good time, so we look for games that we’re both relatively good at. We can see the fact that we’re both striving players by how we manipulate our capacity to win in the long-term. Suppose that we have found a game at which we are perfectly matched and are having a lovely set of intense gaming sessions with. Suppose one of us finds a strategy guide to that game. If that person were to read it by themselves, they would pull ahead and start winning. If we were achievement players, then we each should want to read that guide. But we don’t, and it is perfectly reasonable that we don’t. We are willing to suppress our capacity to win in the long-term — even though we try, with all our might, to win during the game. Our extra-game behavior reveals that we aren’t actually interested in winning in any enduring sense. Our interest in winning is merely something we temporarily adopt, in order to create the experience of that delicious struggle.

But gamification is an entirely different matter. In gamification, the designers are instrumentalizing the goals of our real-life activities. FitBit, by gamifying exercise, invites us to change our goals for our health and fitness. And Twitter, by gamifying discourse, invites us to change our goals for conversation, communication, and declaration. Instrumentalizing one’s goals is fine in striving games, because the goals in games were never valuable, in and of themselves, in the first place. But in real life activity, the goals are often independently valuable.

Twitter’s gamification 31 changes our communicative goals away from understanding, connection, and the collective pursuit of truth, and bends them towards something much more impoverished.

To put it more formally: an echo chamber is a social structure in which: 1. One must subscribe to a certain belief system to be a member. 2. That belief system includes the belief that all non-members are untrustworthy, and all members trustworthy.

Compare echo chambers to a nearby phenomenon: that of epistemic bubbles. An epistemic bubble is a social structure where insiders aren’t exposed to views on the outside. Despite the superficial similarity, epistemic bubbles and echo chambers work through entirely different mechanisms. In an echo chamber, inside members may have plenty of exposure to outside views, but outside voices have been undermined. Epistemic bubbles are structures of bad connectivity; echo chambers are structures of manipulated credence. In an epistemic bubble, outside voices aren’t heard; in an echo chamber, outside voices have been systematically discredited.

Why might one enter into an echo chamber? In my earlier discussion, I focused on the possibility that one might be raised in an echo chamber, and, through no fault of one’s own, been trapped in an errant system of trust. But here I would like to focus on another possibility: that some people choose to enter echo chambers because being in an echo chamber is more comfortable and more pleasurable. Life outside of an echo chambers is full of all kinds of cognitive difficulties. We must constantly struggle with conflicting evidence and unexplained phenomena. And we are confronted, over and over again, with evidence of our own cognitive fallibility. These confrontations humble us — which is good for us, but also quite painful.

Echo chambers banish all that epistemic friction.31 They remove, through distrust, the impact of disagreeing voices. Instead of having to cope with new evidence, echo chambers typically present their members with clear, coherent stories about the world. Instead of the humbling confrontation with the evidence of one’s errors, echo chambers offer their members the joys of unanimity and uninterrupted confidence.

And notice: these joys are very much akin to the joys of value clarity that we found in games. And both forms of joy emerge from similar engineered conditions. Games involve redesigning the agent’s goals and abilities for pleasure. Echo chambers involve re-engineering their members’ belief system and trust settings for pleasure. And echo chambers are dangerous because they re-engineer, not some temporary and segregated belief system, but real llife belief systems which govern real-life action.

Plausibly, Twitter’s makers consciously designed it for pleasure and addictiveness, for the sake of profit. So there are two instrumentalizations here. First, Twitter’s makers are designing for gamification for the sake of profit, which they pursue by making their design seductively pleasurable to its end-users. And second, those users are accepting the seduction, and gamifying their discourse for the sake of pleasure. At both levels, we find people willing to forsake the original goals of discourse for some other end.

Similarly, many echo chambers are plausibly designed for political control.

Another way to put it: gamification, echo chambers, and moral outrage porn go together like junk food. Different kinds of junk food are unhealthy in different ways — some are too high in salt, some too high in fat, some too high in sugar. But the reason they are often consumed together is that they are all likely to be consumed by somebody who is willing to trade off health and nutrition in return for a certain kind of quick pleasure. The same is true of gamification, moral outrage porn, and echo chambers. They are all readily available sources of a certain quick and easy pleasure, available to anybody willing to relax with their moral and epistemic standards
