#essay 
#authors [[content/content/jelani favors]]
https://thepointmag.com/politics/the-second-curriculum/

#quotes 
When I was a student in Dr. Mack’s class at A&T, lectures that dissected our country’s long, tortured history with race were commonplace. These yielded fierce discussion and debate among my peers, but there was never any question that racism was a cancer eating away at the social, moral and political fabric of our nation, only differences in opinion about how to cure it. **This has long been a defining characteristic of the unique community established at HBCUs. From the very beginning, Black colleges have been laboratories for dissent, where students took on the race question directly in classrooms and campus newspapers, in dormitories and at events hosted by student organizations.** Recalling his experience as a student at Atlanta University, civil rights activist James Weldon Johnson noted that “the atmosphere of the place was charged with it. **Students talked ‘race.’ It was the subject of essays, orations and debates. Nearly all that was acquired, mental, and moral, was destined to be fitted into a particular system of which ‘race’ was the center.”**

The HBCU model produced scores of unsung faculty who excelled at empowering their students and pushing them to assume their place in the larger freedom struggle. One example is that of Dr. Rodney Higgins, who was recruited to Southern University in 1946 by the university president, Dr. Felton Clark. When Clark asked Higgins if he would launch the political science department and serve as its first chair, he composed a letter to Clark outlining his thoughts and vision for how the political science department at Southern University would operate. “It is common knowledge that democracy is not only on trial, but very near conviction, unless new evidence is produced to liberate it,” wrote Higgins. “**The adequate defense of democracy is a knowledge of democracy. Totalitarianism survives and flourishes under the veil of ignorance. The university must set the standards for individual freedom, national development, and world citizenship.”** With those words, Higgins captured the essence and distinct nature of the academic experience at HBCUs. For Higgins and countless others who were influenced by the racialized spaces of Black colleges, **the purpose of the university was inextricably linked to rooting out white supremacy and other antidemocratic practices found deeply embedded within the soul of America.**

Our democracy, now as then, remains “on trial.” **Black colleges matter—not just because they eschew intolerance, but because they embody the hope that current attempts to undermine our democracy will reignite the activist energies that produced some of the most important movements in American history.** With the recent spate of philanthropic support that has accompanied the growing call for restitution for historically underfunded Black colleges, and the return of prominent Black intellectuals like Nikole Hannah-Jones and Ta-Nehisi Coates to teaching positions at HBCUs like Howard, there is reason to hope that these crucial institutions will remain viable and accessible for future generations. “That really is the community that made me,” Coates said after announcing his acceptance of a tenured chair in Howard’s English department. “I would not be who I am without the faculty at Howard.”

It’s been more than 25 years since I sat in Dr. Mack’s class and had the privilege of him calling me his “little friend.” I remember distinctly the nervous joy I felt, a few weeks into Dr. Mack’s class, when I knocked on his door to introduce myself. I was seeking out his recollections of teaching my parents, or whatever anecdotes he could provide that would help me heal the pain of losing a father too soon. While he indulged my desire to walk down memory lane, he quickly steered the conversation toward gaining a better understanding of who I was, why was I there and where I was going. In my naïveté, I answered him literally, and was soon made to understand that the information he sought had far more to do with my position in relation to my ancestors, my knowledge of the sacred space that I occupied in attending an HBCU and my future goals that dealt not with how I would advance myself, but how I would help uplift others. He believed in the power and potential of humanity and transmitted a distinctly Black pedagogical tradition that emphasized democracy and citizenship for all. For generations HBCUs have taught students **“how to sail and where to anchor,”** realizing that grappling with the questions of who we are, **where we are going and who we can help along the way are among the most significant educational experiences one can have. The fruits of that legacy are abundant and have profoundly shaped the moral character and political destiny of our nation.**