Jeffers and Dale dropped out of high school to work on the oil rig in Alaska. It paid good money and they could drink beer with their buddies every night at the local bar. Nothing could go wrong, they thought. Until oil was no longer king. Data was king. Tax payers dollars, instead of supporting big oil, went to big data. This meant they were constantly surveilled - every waking moment, every step, was tracked - so this information could be sold to companies who would harvest it on farms. Every spring, a new shipment of data would come through and data carriers unpacked the data, handed it off to the engineers, who would crunch the numbers and pick out the lucky few in a lottery. The contest took place every winter when most people were hibernating. Winters were brutal in Alaska, especially in the year 2200, when climate change turned the ice more brutal, more cold, more frigid, more slippery. The only way around it was surveillance. If you wanted to escape the ice and the cold, you had to sell your information to the government. The leading political party did good things with your information. They scrubbed it free. 

How could data surveillance be used for good? Information about where we go, who we talk to... we are watched. There is no privacy, but that means everyone is accountable to one another. 

Private information is not private. Like the hang out spots you visit - restaurants, airports. We upload all of this so people can come visit you. In cyberspace, you are never lonely. If you want a friend to come play, you can choose what kind of person you want, or random. People's traits are uploaded to a system. But this society understands that people's personalities can change based on the situation. Sometimes, extraverted people want to be introverted and vice versa. You may want to go to the library and want a partner to talk to books about. You may go to a bar and want a partner to just chit chat with. You may visit a coffee shop or a freelance studio and want a fellow entrepreneur to hang out with and talk shop. 

Humanity raises up a notch, becoming better people, because we have good, positive, stimulating conversations and are never bored. Where are the evil people who want to hurt others so they can get ahead? They don't exist because those people are sniped and sent to a love facility, where their personality is analyzed and they are given a purpose. 

Everyone has a purpose. Some people are data garbage collectors. Shards of data are discarded onto the streets every day. These are bad, negative thoughts. They get used every day, processed, and then discarded as waste. Some get recycled at the end of the month and put in museums. 

**The museum of good thoughts. Exhibits of bad thoughts. There is a new exhibit every month. People from all over the world can apply. If you get in, you get a badge. This means you worked on your thought, it is now outside of you, and others can come to the museum to learn from it. This creates a sense of connection and belonging with humanity. Wealthy people pay for these exhibits. They collect the pieces and they go up in value, the better the person becomes at managing their thoughts.** 

Dinosaurs. 