---
title: "Closer to Reality"
date: 2022-06-09
tags:
- seed
---
Source: [The Beginning of Infinity, David Deutsch](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/10483171-the-beginning-of-infinity)

## Highlights
A galaxy is a mind-bogglingly huge thing. For that matter, a star is a mind-bogglingly huge thing. Our own planet is. A human brain is -in terms of both its internal complexity and the reach of human ideas. And there can be thousands of galaxies in a cluster, which can be millions of light years across. **The phrase 'thousands of galaxies' trips lightly off the tongue, but it takes a while to make room in one's mind for the reality of it.**

I was wrong to be impressed by the mere scale of what I was looking at. Some people become depressed at the scale of the universe, because it makes them feel insignificant. Other people are relieved to feel insignificant, which is even worse. But, in any case, those are mistakes. **Feeling insignificant because the universe is large has exactly the same logic as feeling inadequate for not being a cow. Or a herd of cows. The universe is not there to overwhelm us; it is our home, and our resource. The bigger the better.**

**But then there is the philosophical magnitude of a cluster of galaxies**. As I moved the cross-hairs to one nondescript galaxy after another, clicking at what I guessed to be the centre of each, some whimsical thoughts occurred to me. I wondered whether I would be the first and last human being ever to pay conscious attention to a particular galaxy. I was looking at the blurry object for only a few seconds, yet it might be laden with meaning for all I knew. **It contains billions of planets.**

**Each planet is a world. Each has its own unique history-sunrises and sunsets; storms, seasons; in some cases continents, oceans, earthquakes, rivers.** Were any of those worlds inhabited? Were there astronomers there? Unless they were an exceedingly ancient, and advanced, civilization, those people would never have travelled outside their galaxy. So they would never have seen what it looked like from my perspective-though they might know from theory. Were any of them at that moment staring at the Milky Way, asking the same questions about us as I was about them? If so, then they were looking at our galaxy as it was when the most advanced forms of life on Earth were fish.

The computers that nowadays catalogue galaxies may or may not do it better than the graduate students used to. **But they certainly do not experience such reflections as a result.** I mention this because I often hear scientific research described in rather a bleak way, suggesting that it is mostly mindless toil. **The inventor Thomas Edison once said, 'None of my inventions came by accident. I see a worthwhile need to be met and I make trial after trial until it comes.** What it boils down to is one per cent inspiration and ninety-nine per cent perspiration." Some people say the same about theoretical research, where the 'perspiration' phase is supposedly uncreative intellectual work such as doing algebra or translating algorithms into computer programs. **But the fact that a computer or a robot can perform a task mindlessly does not imply that it is mindless when scientists do it**. After all, computers play chess mindlessly-by exhaustively searching the consequences of all possible moves - **but humans achieve a similar-looking functionality in a completely different way, by creative and enjoyable thought.** **Perhaps those galaxy-cataloguing computer programs were written by those same graduate students, distilling what they had learned into reproducible algorithms.** Which means that they must have learned something while performing a task that a computer performs without learning anything. But, more profoundly, **I expect that Edison was misinterpreting his own experience. A trial that fails is still fun.** 


Because an error in experimental science is a mistake about the cause of something. Like an accurate observation, it is a matter of theory. Very little in nature is detectable by unaided human senses. **Most of what happens is too fast or too slow, too big or too small, or too remote, or hidden behind opaque barriers, or operates on principles too different from anything that influenced our evolution. But in some cases we Can arrange for such phenomena to become perceptible, via scientific instruments.**

CLOSER TO REALITY

or misunderstood phenomenon anywhere in the chain can, and often does, render the resulting sensory experience arbitrarily misleading. Yet, over time, the conclusions that science has drawn have become ever truer to reality. Its quest for good explanations corrects the errors, allows for the biases and misleading perspectives, and fills in the gaps. **This is what we can achieve when, as Feynman said, we keep learning more about how not to fool ourselves.**

Telescopes contain automatic tracking mechanisms that continuously realign them so as to compensate for the effect of the Earth's motion; in some, computers continuously change the shape of the mirror so as to compensate for the shimmering of the Earth's atmosphere. And so, observed through such a telescope, stars do not appear to twinkle or to move across the sky as they did to generations of observers in the past. Those things are only appearance - parochial error. **They have nothing to do with the reality of stars. The primary function of the telescope's optics is to reduce the illusion that the stars are few, faint twinkling and moving.** **The same is true of every feature of the telescope and of all other scientific instruments: each layer of indirectness through its associated theory, corrects errors, illusions, misleading perspectives and gaps. Perhaps it is the mistaken empiricist ideal c 'pure', theory-free observation that makes it seem odd that trul accurate observation is always so hugely indirect. But the fact is the progress requires the application of ever more knowledge in advance of our observations.**

So I was indeed looking at galaxies. Observing a galaxy via spec of silver is no different in that regard from observing a garden with images on a retina. In all cases, to say that we have genuinely observed any given thing is to say that we have accurately attributed our evidence (ultimately always evidence inside our own brains) to that thing. **Scientific truth consists of such correspondence between theories and physical reality.**

It is a marvelous fact that objects can exist which, when we observe them, accurately take on the appearance and other attributes of other objects that are elsewhere and very differently constituted, Our sensory systems are such objects too, for it is only they that are directly affecting our brains when we perceive anything.

Such instruments are rare and fragile configurations of matter. Press one wrong button on the telescope's control panel, or code one wrong instruction into its computer, and the whole immensely complex artefact may well revert to revealing nothing other than itself. The same would be true if, instead of making that scientific instrument, you were to assemble those raw materials into almost any other configuration: stare at them, and you would see nothing other than them.

Explanatory theories tell us how to build and operate instruments in exactly the right way to work this miracle. Like conjuring tricks in reverse, such instruments fool our senses into seeing what is really there. Our minds, through the methodological criterion that I mentioned in Chapter 1, conclude that a particular thing is real if and only if it figures in our best explanation of something. Physically, all that has happened is that human beings, on Earth, have dug up raw materials such as iron ore and sand, and have rearranged them - still on Earth - into complex objects such as radio telescopes, computers and display screens, and now, instead of looking at the sky, they look at those objects. **They are focusing their eyes on human artefacts that are close enough to touch. But their minds are focused on alien entities and processes, light years away.** Sometimes they are still looking at glowing dots just as their ancestors did - but on computer monitors instead of the sky. **Sometimes they are looking at numbers or graphs. But in all cases they are inspecting local phenomena: pixels on a screen, ink on paper, and so on. These things are physically very unlike stars: they are much smaller; they are not dominated by nuclear forces and gravity; they are not capable of transmuting elements or creating life; they have not been there for billions of years. But when astronomers look at them, they see stars.**
