I woke up this morning with thoughts swirling in my mind, as usual. 

First off though, I slept really well. I had a dream that did not make me feel uncomfortable. Sadly, I don't remember what the dream was. I didn't write it down. But I do remember how I felt and it was pleasant. 

Then, when I lay in bed a little while longer, I started to talk my way in my head into feeling bad. I feel bad now. It's not good or bad...I feel something else...

I was thinking about Alex and how I have this inkling of a feeling that I need to end things with him. I went back and forth on whether I should. I was indecisive. The negative about Alex is his looks and how he dresses. His bad haircut, yellow plaque on his lips, his skin has a few big whiteheads. It makes me feel like he doesn't take care of himself. 

I thought about how my problem with Harry was not listening to my gut enough. There were all of these warnings signs about who he is as a person that made me want to not be with him -- there were character defects that I missed. But, at the beginning I really liked Harry. He was very friendly. He was direct. But over time he just became a shithead. Spoiled, entitled, despicable. He was an asshole. I could write a whole brief about Harry and how despicable and horrible he is. 

Everything makes sense in the rearview mirror...

Alex makes me feel supported and cared for, like Harry never did. 

While I was laying in bed, I also thought about work...leaving Foster. The honest reason is because Dan is cray. He talked about his previous mental illness. He talked about how he is only sober for a year. He said that cults can be good and have good qualities to them. I got scared that he's building a cult. 

