What a great evening with Alex last night (drinks). Our pre-date date.

A mistake I don't want to make is "therapizing" the relationship or bringing work into the relationship. He's a federal prosecutor but I don't want him bringing his work approach into our relationship.  He can ask me questions and get to know me to dig deeper but to some extent, the past is also the past, and it's important to turn off work and just be a human. To have multitudes, as Whitman says. 

I really like Alex. Despite his initially sloppy-ish kiss that wasn't on my lips. Is it because my lips are small and his are bigger? It must be. He's a bigger guy, with bigger lips. Albeit not tall. 

He called me out for being passive aggressive with the nail salon. He's right. and I like that bot him. 

He told me his ex struggled with anxiety and depression and it sounds like he wasn't responding to her appropriately. He would try to encourage her and boost her confidence and tell her she's okay, but she didn't respond well. 

I feel more in communion knowing that I am not the only one who desperately tries to help their partner and then their partner flips on them. That's what mental health issues make you do. You feel trapped, burnt out, and your mind about your partner changes. 

I don't want to make the wrong choice with my next partner. I want to choose wisely. That's all there is. I don't need to fall head over heels and immediately marry him on a whim or go all in on a whim. 

Go All In, is a Foster Writing thing. Work. And that stays at work. 

I need to learn how to say mature things to men. Not "I like your muscles" , but like really seeing him for who he is. What compliments do men want to hear? How do I make a man really seen? 

I want to tell Alex that I've worked a lot on my relationship and myself, specifically what about me is it that allowed myself to be mistreated and not have my needs met, over and over again. 