I slept only ~6.5 hours and was awake with excitement about my date tonight with Alex. I feel an anxiety that makes it difficult to focus. My mind is FULL. Worries have started to pop up, like finances, like Harry's crazy mom. I want to reduce craziness in my life. 

That's why yesterday I quit Foster DAO. I think Dan is a psycho cult leader. He takes in the mentally ill, as he himself is ill, has them share very vulnerably, put emotions out there, and then they feel held and supported in this 'container' that he has created. I liked it at first and as a (writer? yes, i'm a writer but why would this matter for how I feel around Dan) (as a human who has emotional problems, more so in the past), it felt supportive to share deeply and hear others share deeply. 

Problem with Dan is he keeps talking about how he wants to write a memoir but then there are people he doesn't want to hurt (fear), but also he is so busy with running Foster as a business. 

I don't think he edited my piece about money in a constructive way. He made me scratch a lot of it, which is not up to him. It's my piece and it's how I want to write it. This is a touchy thing actually. Should an editor scratch a writer's piece if it really is 'bad'? Or is this just where they are and the author can publish wherever they are. Meet them where they are. 

I'm tired of writing personal, emotional things for my newsletter. It was helpful at first but now no. 

Caryn is like Dan's puppet. Like that woman in FTX Ventures who was SBF's puppet. Everyone kind of seems like Dan's puppet. It's not an autonomous organization. 

Reading and watching film (art) has always helped me to expand my worldview and draw connection to my real life. To see patterns. 