Working backwards. 

Today, right now, I am at Buckhead Village with the fancy folk. Attractive older folk float my boat these days. Good stuff y'all. 

Last night, I went to Davin & Maressa's. The Wildlife Fundraiser was pretty hick. But it was fun nonetheless. Kind of. Except D&M had a lot of tension between them and I could feel it. It was nada good. We also watched Scream at their house and ate bbq & corn and talked. It really seems like Davin doesn't wanna help himself with finding community. How did I get so lucky? So fortunate? I am inclined to say it was my hard work but Davin works hard too. 

Friday night, Brice came over and we watched Hereditary. My first scary movie in a long time. I was not scared. We laughed. Because other than gore and creepy, the plot doesn't unfold in such a way that I was scared. Parasite was so good because it was deep. The character arcs were really deep and voluminous. Complex.  

I feel familiarity with the women sitting across from me. Their body language is a bit cold. They are sitting far from one another. They look like friends or sisters who have met up. 

Do I want to be part of this scene? IDK, probs not. The Inman Park scene may be more my style. I can check it out maybe next week. 

There's a lot of stuff going on. Meaning, IDK. My mind feels kinda blank today. I just wanna lay down and relax. I'm tired. What's wrong with being tired and wanting to relax? Well, I thought today I would write. I am writing. I thought I would write some interesting work. 

I'm doing fine, overall. I'm in a new city and some things feel old, some things feel new. I want to find more local community. I keep on focusing on what I don't have instead of what I do have. Yes, because I feel like I am lacking. And it's tough. I look at these fancy people and think, damn, are they happy? They're in the scene, whatever that means...but are they happy? I have no idea without talking to them and forming my own opinion. 

I could resort to doing some check the box activities for productivity but I really don't want to. Like so bad I don't want to. Because they're not important. What are those activities?

- Yina/Dan staying over? Change AA flight? Contact Sveta? (reach out to yina this evening).
-  Apartment needs curtains. 
- Respond to Jesse about settlement/look at settlement docs 
- Reload breeze card
- Buy halloween tickets

I let loose yesterday. Why is that a problem? It's not! 

Our minds think in stories. So share some stories. 