Source: [The Future of Optimism Governance](https://gov.optimism.io/t/the-future-of-optimism-governance/6471)
#processed  
### Notes

The goal of Optimism's governance is to 1) capture resistance and 2) allocate resources effectively.

Soft power = carrot 
Hard power = stick

Citizen's House is in charge of Retro PGF funding
### Quotes

> 	There are two **primary goals** of Optimism’s governance system:
> 	1. Governance should (a) make it possible for chain or network operation to **continue without reliance on any individual entity**, and (b) **prevent any one entity or small group of entities from being able to control or censor the protocol or its functions**.
> 	2. Governance’s second primary responsibility is to **allocate resources effectively to support the Collective’s vision and accrue sustainable value to the Optimism Collective**.

*Who are the stakeholders aka the entities who would be able to control or censor the protocol or its functions? In DeFi protocols, liquidity providers have a heavy hand. 

> Design decisions for the Collective’s governance system should be made in line with three key principles"
		1. Governance minimization: The Collective aims to reduce governance to its essence and to avoid introducing regulation where freedom can achieve the same result. This principle is key to encouraging **permissionless innovation**
			a. In practice, this looks like a minimal set of (1) onchain governance rights to upgrade Optimism contracts and tune the economic parameters of the system, and (2) offchain social processes to maintain a healthy community.
		2. Iteration
			1. This iteration gives the Collective a chance to learn how to make thoughtful decisions using an un-intuitive but essential loop: introduce a governance process that involves active participation, then gradually work to automate or minimize it over time. Governance’s responsibility then becomes to adjust the autopilot when necessary, not to keep two hands on the wheel.
		3. Forking
			1. Participants will be more likely to join Optimism if they have the right to make an alternative.
				*on paper, they don't want to exploit lock in effects*
			
**Design Overview**
>The responsibilities of Optimism Governance can be categorized into one of the two primary goals of the governance system: **Capture Resistance** and **Resource Allocation**

>Token House, made up of OP Tokenholders and their delegates, is responsible for decisions that affect business parameters of the system such as inflation or the variables that govern sequencer selection

>Citizens’ House uses a one-person, one-vote system. Citizens’ House is responsible for decisions that may require prioritizing long term growth ahead of other goals – decisions like allocating funding to public goods that support the Collective. In the long term, we can expect the Citizens’ House to expand to include the thousands or millions or billions of humans interacting with Optimism.

**Problem Space #1: Capture Resistance****

>Capture Resistance 
>	Hard Powers - governance rights that are eventually encoded and executed onchain
>		1. Protocol Upgrades - The Token House is the primary approver because of its broad reach and likelihood of representing business interests that depend on the OP Stack’s functionality. A Citizens’ House veto right guards against capture of the Token House and increases the resilience of the overall system.
>			- *It's not all about business interests/LPs. That's why citizens house looks out for long term protocol health
>		2. **Sequencer Selection** - is the ability to make choices about which parties may act as sequencers for OP Chains or in shared sequencing schemes.
>			- Sequencers are important economic actors for OP Chains and eventually for the **Superchain.** The Token House is well-incentivized to make sure sequencer selection is fair and beneficial for the Collective. A **Citizens’ House veto right guards against the capture of the Token House related to sequencer selection.**
>			
>	Soft Powers - social norms the governance community upholds, not enforced onchain but by the community’s ability to fork

>Citizenship Eligibility is the right of governance to select new humans to participate in the Citizens’ House of Optimism Governance.
	Citizenship Eligibility will be determined by the Citizens’ House; the Token House will have veto rights. Assuming good long-term values alignment with the Collective, Citizens should be incentivized to grow a set of voters that make quality decisions about RetroPGF allocations. A Token House veto guards against capture of the Citizens’ House or moves to consolidate power.

**Problem Space #2: Resource Allocation

>Resource allocation in the Collective comes in three forms:
	**1 Allocation of Protocol Revenue** - is the responsibility of governance to determine how to direct surplus ETH generated by the Optimism protocol
		- Optimism generates revenue through transaction fees paid on OP Mainnet and other OP Chains. Part of these transaction fees is used to post data to Ethereum L1 and pay for other expenses associated with running the protocol, and the remainder of the fee is accumulated as surplus revenue that can be directed by the Collective for the benefit of the Collective
	2/ **OP Treasury Management**  -  is the responsibility of governance to direct how the existing OP token treasury is allocated. This has several components:
		1. The **Governance Fund**, which is directed by Token House governance.
		2. The **RetroPGF Fund**, which is directed by Citizens’ House governance, with Token House veto right.
		3. The **Seed Fund** and **Unallocated** portions of the token treasury, which are initially administered by the Foundation, and will eventually be directed jointly by both houses.
		4. **Foundation Budget Approvals**, which are governed jointly by both houses.
		5. **Inflation adjustments**, which are governed by the Token House, with Citizens’ House veto right.
	3/ **RetroPGF Funding** -  is the right of governance to allocate RetroPGF grants to projects that have provided public good to the Optimism Collective



